It was an event that traumatized in the nation at 11:39 AM on January the 28th,
1986,
the space shuttle challenger lifted off from Cape Canaveral bound for the stars
across the nation. Millions tuned to seas historic flight,
the flight that were put an ordinary civilian, a school teacher,
Chris Macor cliff into space for the first time. Instead,
those viewers witnessed a tragedy. 73 seconds is into its journey.
The challenge of disintegrated at 46,000 feet,
the resistant fire above a smoke and then nothing but numb silence today,
the challenge of disaster remains SEAD onto the national consciousness.
But while the story of the tragedy itself has been told and retold,
it's a different story.
We are interested in today or rather seven different stories.
The stories of seven lives each utterly unique and wonderfully ordinary the
lives of seven crew members who died that fateful morning in today's biographics
we're uncovering the real people behind one of America's most iconic tragedies.
On paper,
the early lives of Allison on Auca and Ronald McNair couldn't have looked more
different.
The two grew up over 5,000 miles apart on Asuka in the rural paradise of kalac
aura, Hawaiians McNair in the S sweltering,
racially segregated lake city in South Carolina honor's parents were Japanese
Americans who ran a small general store and Kres coffee plantations.
They weren't exactly well off, but neither were they poor McNair.
On the other hand,
grew up knowing the value of labor of having to help his family picking cotton
in the harvest season, beneath the brutal Southern sun yet,
despite their superficial differences, these two boys were still United by one,
sing by invisible threads, linking them across many miles. At nights,
both boys looked up at the sky and they liked to dream.
The older of the two on Zuku was born on June the 24th, 1946.
His birth name was Ozuka showy reflecting his Japanese heritage,
but his childhood couldn't have been a more perfect picture of rural Hawaiian
life. By day,
the boy played among the coffee plantations and explored ancient caves,
but it was at night that Ozuka soul really came alive. Much later.
He had recall evening spent lying on his back, staring up in awe of the stars,
above him at the vast spread of the Milky way.
Shimmering like lights of a far off city.
He said that he used to dream of reaching up there and grabbing hold of those
stars. It may have been, he,
his only respite from a childhood that was busy as hell UCAS parents knew
the key to life was a good education and they made sure the boy worked his off
at school, combined with his job in the family store,
his basketball and some time with the boy Scouts, it made for a brutal schedule,
but it also gave the boy drive drive that would one day taken closer to the
stars than he, of other dreams.
It was a feeling that distant Ron McNair might have recognized born on the
21st of October,
1950 McNair grew up in a town stalked by the ghosts of Jim Crow.
Local Klan meant that sometimes find bullets into black folks, houses,
public spaces were segregated and things like success were only supposed to
be for white kids,
but not even the full force of the South's racism was enough to keep Ron McNair
from his dreams in 1959,
not long after a Shep had became the first American in space.
The young boy decided to read up on the universe to nourish his secret goal of
following in Shep's footsteps. He went down to his local library,
a space that was legally desegregated, but in practice,
it was white only and got an awful of books. As he stood in line.
MCNA recalled hearing all those white adult whispering things like who has this
Negro, when it was his turn, the librarian refused to serve him, get out.
She told him, well, she called the police rather than run McNair.
Hold himself over the counter, told the woman his right to be there.
When the police came, he argued with them too.
The encounter ended with this nine year old boy getting his books stamped and
walking outta the library had held high.
It was the first glimmer of McNair's superhuman determination. Many years later,
when that determination had taken him out of the south first MIT,
and then to NASA, that library would be renamed in his honor,
seven years after his encounter with south Carolina's original.
Karen McNair was at home one day watching a brand new show called star Trek.
Live long and prosper.
By now, Ellison on Ozuka had left Hawaii to study in Boulder,
but the teenage McNair was still in school, still at home.
As they watched this new show, Ron's brother remarked that the alien were fine,
but this idea that white people would one day live and work with black folks was
unrealistic. Ron just kept quiet. I looked at it as science fiction.
His brother later said, cuz that wasn't gonna happen. But Ronald saw it.
A science possibility
Much later, both Ellison on Zuki and Ron MCNA would embrace the milestones.
They achieved the first Japanese American and second African American in space.
But Judith Renik always kicked back blessed with the brain,
the size of a planet.
It annoyed her no ends that the press preferred to focus on her status as the
second American woman and first American Jew in orbit,
especially when report asked our staff like, do you wear makeup in space,
cringe, inducing, casual misogynists aside.
Everyone knew that Resnick wasn't just at NASA for her XX chromosomes born in
Akron, Ohio on April the fifth,
1949 Resnick's background was solidly middle class and solidly Jewish as a kid.
She learned Hebrew,
but it wouldn't be in religion that she fell out inspiration,
but rather maths from the earliest days REIC was available. Prodigy.
When it came time to suit hers, a T she scored a perfect 800 on both tests.
Something barely a quarter of, 1% of test takers achieved on top of that.
She trained herself up in her spare time to become a skilled classical pianist.
But while re Nick's life may have looked like a series of wins things weren't
always perfect. At the age of 17,
her parents marriage ended in a messy divorce by now.
Judith had grown into a single-minded teenager with a shock of curly hair that
she rolled with small orange juice scans to try and straighten it out.
When her parents split. She, but cut her mother off,
choosing to live solely with her dad. When she first went into space,
she pointedly held up a sign saying, hi dad,
her strict mom would never get a similar greeting, but that was Judith.
Renik all over. When she set her mind to something,
be it personal or professional, that was simply no changing it.
She wanted to study electrical engineering. She did it.
She wanted to get her PhD. She did it. She wanted to apply for NASA. Well,
you get the idea for Dick SCOBY.
This insane motivation may well have brought a rise, smile to his face,
hear all people knew what it was like to really commit to something.
The commander of the challenger. Well,
faith all day Francis Richard SCOBY was born on may the 19th,
1939 in the shadow of Mount rain rather than a prodigy like Greig though,
his childhood was defined by his seeming lack of greatness.
He was big and a little slow, not a bad student,
but not a particularly good one, nor was he all that social as a teenager,
a good night out for SCOBY was going to the rainbow cafe with a couple of
friends and finishing a whole bottle of ketchup with his fries.
Most people did a small town,
assumed it grabbed work on the railroads like his dad.
So when he enlisted in the air force right out of high school,
it was something of a shock still SCOI wasn't training to be a pilot or
anything. He was a propeller mechanic,
not all that different from the blue collar works that he might have done on the
railroads. Little did his friends realize that this was just the beginning buy,
never excelling. SCOI did have one quality that stood out in his early life.
He never the gave up. It could be the football training. He'd never missed. One.
Saw the studies. He worked hard at harder than the brain he could,
who could just coast through life.
This was his secret weapon knowing he wasn't naturally gifted,
but SCOBY also knew that he had to work 20 times as hard to get anywhere.
And so that's exactly what he did repairing planes in the air force. By day,
he studied all night at, into the airmen's education and commissioning program.
It took until 1966, but he finally made it finally became an officer.
Finally got his wings, but it wouldn't be straight to NASA.
First Dick SCOBY was going to earn his stripes in the Inferno of war.
On the morning of January the 16th, 1978,
George AEY sat down in his eighth floor office at the NASA Johnson space center
to make an important call or rather a series of important calls across the
country.
Anxious people were waiting by their phones desperate to know if they'd made it.
If they'd be one of the 35 selected for NASA's first astronaut training program
in over a decade. Prior to that win morning,
the last set of recruits had been the X S 11 class to way back in
1967, also known as astronaut group six. There'd been smart commendable people,
but there'd also been uniformly male and uniformly white a description that
could also fit astronaut group seven brought over in 1969 from an abandoned air
force space program with the 19 is approaching NASA wanted a group that would
better reflect America, a group in which being white and having a dog.
Wasn't a deal breakup.
The calls George a made that day would be the first tentative step along that
path along the first notified was Ellison on Azu cup since leaving Hawaii in the
1960s on AKA's career had taken off like, well,
a rocket armed with a degree in aerospace engineering.
The boy from Kona had enrolled in the air force becoming a test pilot,
but while plenty of Flyboy had egos bigger than their aircraft on Asuka charmed
everyone with his modesty. He threw backyard.
Lou OS for his workmates complete with all roasted hogs,
served the ground crew steaming mugs of Ko of coffee.
Yet he wasn't the only beloved air force pilot in NASA's new class.
After getting his wings, Dick SCOBY had survived.
The green hail of the Vietnam war. A cargo pilot had come under enemy fire,
taking hits in several runs and experience.
He never liked to talk about yet traumatic as Vietnam was it didn't put SCOI off
flying back in the us.
The railroad workers son had followed a similar career to Ozuka test piloting
experimental aircraft.
This had included the X 24 B a prototype one step below the space shuttle
itself. So when naer opened its doors for applications,
it was only natural SCOBY would apply,
but don't go thinking SCOI was just some adrenaline junkie outside flying
Scooby's greatest joys were painting and taking evening walks with his wife,
holding hands. As the stars came out,
it was a relaxed time life that probably wouldn't have suited Ron McNair,
unlike on zoo and SCOBY McNair's path, hadn't taken him to the air force,
but instead to being a badass scientist, after graduating in 1967,
the boy from South Carolina had sworn to have his PhD. In 10 years,
he left the south headed to MIT where I graduated age 26 with both a doctorate
in laser physics and some eccentric hobbies.
McNair was seriously into karate.
How serious while so serious that it written an article for scientific American
on the physics of martial arts,
which is basically 18 boy fantasy of what science is like.
He was also an accomplished saxophone in player in 1984.
It make history by being the first person to play an instrument in space,
but there was at least one other musician among NASA's new hires just by being
known as the 35 new guys. The 1978 intake included six women.
One famously would be Sally ride. The first American women in space.
Another would be Judith Resnik of everyone in this video who isn't named Chris
Macor cliff Renik may have had the strangest journey to NASA in 1970.
She married her college sweetheart and gone to work for the radio corporation of
America there. She settled in.
So what should have been a comfortable middle class existence?
Comfortable had never been enough for REIC no long after divorcing.
She sat on the Delaware shore with some friends. When they,
the form that she was filling in,
it was an application to join NASA with the single mindedness.
She brought to everything. REIC had chased this opportunity,
putting herself through an insane exercise regime to pass the physical.
It had been hard work, but it paid off just before 6:00 AM on January the 16th.
REIC received a call from George,
a out of 10,000 applications she'd made the cut.
Two weeks later REIC would find herself in Houston,
meeting on Zuka McNair and SCOBY for the first time Liz,
did she know how tragically her name would soon be tied to theirs
In NASA history? The 35 new guys hold a special place alongside Sally ride.
The class gave the world ion Blueford,
the first African American in space and Annalee Fisher,
the first mother in orbits, but there are three names,
conspicuously absent from its Illumina. Mike J. Smith,
Gregory Jarvis and Chris coli.
That's because the challenges on the crew members never applied for the
astronaut program.
Instead they enter NASA's orbit in different ways often by fluke,
as we leave Judith Resnick and listen.
And Zuka Ron McNair and Dick SCOBY to their training program.
It's time we met the final challenger, three of all the trio,
the most obvious candidate for future astronaut was easily.
Mike Smith born on the 30th of April, 1945.
Smith childhood was defined eyes fascination with flying his parents' 13 acre
chicken farm was right across from Beaufort Morehead, city, airport.
And the boy grew up witnessing planes rising into the clear skies,
but his connection with flight went deeper than just one airport.
This part of North Carolina, near the outer banks,
fairly drips with aviation history.
It was around here that the Wright brothers made the first flight in 1903.
Mike Smith dreamed of being part of that history during a junior high football
match, the airplane crazy Smith,
spotted a craft overhead and halted the game just so he could stand there and
look on his 16th birthday.
He completed his first solo flight earning his pilot's license before he could
even drive a car. But while Smith would always be obsessed with aircraft,
his dreams were about to be boosted to a whole other level,
just like Ron McNair down in lake city Smith followed Alan Shepard's 1961 space
flight with war.
According to his brother Smith decided right then and there that did one day go
into space. Only his career. Didn't quite take him in that direction.
Enrolling in the us Naval academy in June of 1963,
Smith followed his original passion for airplanes who went to the Navy's flight
school causing only to marry Jane and Gerald. And from there,
it was into war like Dick SCOBY, Mike Smith flew in Vietnam.
Unlike his future commander though Smith flew attack planes big as six intruders
that took off from the aircraft carrier.
Kittyhawk named after the same North Carolina town that Smith had flown over as
a teenager where the Wright brothers took their history changing flight.
When 1978 rolled around and our first four sub JS were applying for NASA's
astronaut school Smith was chilling in the Mediterranean where he'd been
assigned to a ship,
but there must have been a tiny part of him yearning for something more,
a part that remembered how age 16 had listened to news of a Shepard's flight and
dreamed of going into space.
We can infer this because in 1980 NASA approached him with an offer to become an
astronaut. Just weeks before the Navy had offered Smith,
a job of commanding an entire ASIC squadron,
the Smith turned them down for a lower rank and lower pay at NASA speaks volumes
about his priorities. It wasn't easy either effectively demoted.
He had to struggle for two years as a novice. Again,
only finally working his way back up to the rank of commander in 1982,
by now the space shuttle was undertaking regular missions into orbit,
but getting on a flight wasn't guaranteed,
not when so many were waiting that turn. So Smith waited and waited.
He waited as the years passed as the 1978 class went into space,
breaking records and making historical firsts.
He waited until finally one day, his time came in late 1985.
NASA told Mike Smith that scheduled him for his first space flight.
It'd be second in command board. The challenger in January of 1986,
his commander would be Dick SCOBY and with would be E on Asuka Judith
Renik and Ron McNair. Plus two civilians.
One of them was an engineer whose company NASA through it offered seats as a
sort of thanks for work done. The other would be the first teacher in space
On the cold morning of January, the 28th, 1986,
Gregory Jarvis sat back in his shuttle seat facing the sky beside him.
Chris McCali waited patiently as she had for hours. Now,
days of multiple false starts when the flight was repeatedly aborted,
the only two civilians on the challenger both had been given the title of
payload specialists, effectively NASA jargon for people with no specific role.
As the crew waited for the all clear Jarvis passed the time by telling jokes.
He told people privately, he mostly did it for call OFS benefits.
As she seemed nervous,
he didn't acknowledge that the weak gags were to settle his own nerves too.
Born on August the 24th, 1944,
Gregory Jarvis can best be described as endearingly geeky,
official NASA photos show a dorky kind of guy grinning like it just won the
space lottery, given his life's path. That makes a whole lot of sense.
Growing up in the small town of Mohawk,
New York Jarvis's childhood was spent as far from the action and as possible,
but coming from a small town didn't mean having small ambitions after his
parents divorced Jarvis left for good marrying Marcia Jarbo and entering the air
force reserve officer training court arms with the degree in electrical
engineering,
Jarvis and Marcia were dispatched to LA to help build tactical communications
satellites. They expected to be there a short while.
Instead they wound up living in California for 16 years in many way,
those 16 years sound idyllic.
The pair lived in a mustard colored house in a seven minute walk from the ocean,
although they never had kids, they both held an almost childlike love of sports.
Weekends were spent doing long runs going whitewater rafting, surfing,
or taking long biking trips.
Even when Jarvis left the air force in the early 1970s,
moving into the communications arm of Hughes air aircraft,
the couple continued living in LA, but it was at Hughes. The,
the wheels were set in motion for Jarvis's ultimate fate as manager of a project
to build NASA satellites. Jarvis quickly came to his boss's attention.
So when NASA repaid the company by offering two of its engineers seats on the
shuttle,
the higher ups decided to reward Jarvis with the adventure of a lifetime.
Originally was meant to fly in 1985, but then two politicians,
Senator Jake gon and Republican bill Nelson had muscled in on the flights that
had been scheduled for as a result.
Jarvis had been bumped to the challenger still.
It had given him a chance to get to know the most famous crew member of all
Chris CIFF. Even if you've never heard of any of the others in this video,
there's a good chance you knowif born Sharon Krista Corrigan on September the
second, 1948,
but CIFF had known from an early age that she wanted to be a teacher raised in
the small town of framing him outside Boston.
She was the only girl in a family brewed with four boys.
Her parents had been so certain that she'd be male.
That the name Krista was a last minute shortening of her chosen boy name,
Christopher like her parents call if was extremely traditional.
She chose to go to a strict Catholic school.
And when it came time for her to go to college,
offered to go to the local cheaper university.
So her parents would've more money to spend on her brothers on campus.
She avoided the social movements of the late 1960s.
Instead focusing on a history course and relationship with high school called
sweetheart Steven McCollough, but like the others in this video,
she harbored a secret dream call.
If two remembered a sheds 1961 voyage like Mike Smith and Ron McNair,
she dreamed the following in his footsteps.
Not that this seemed even remotely possible in the fall of 1917 McCollough began
teaching eventually settling in Concord, New Hampshire.
Her goal was to bring her twin subjects of history and social studies alive,
something she did by using diaries of female pioneers and inviting people with
interesting lives to speak before the class.
By the time Ronald Reagan announced the teacher in space program in 1984 MC CIFF
was a successful teacher. A mother of two,
someone has settled into ordinary life as it's possible to be.
It turns out that's exactly what NASA we're looking for.
The agency's brief with the teacher in space program was to pick someone who
could represent normal Americans,
the sort of dedicated public servants that crystal embodied it.
Doubtless helps that in her application,
she emphasized the positive effect of seeing another woman in space would have
on the girls that she taught. She even pledged to keep her own pioneer diary,
recording her life on the final frontier.
And so it was that Chris CIFF came to sit next to Gregory jar is on that day.
Now a national celebrity smiling at his corny jokes as they waited for launch at
exactly 11:39 AM. The engines began to roar the rocket beneath them,
began to shake an almighty rumbling that seemed to fill every fiber of their
being with a great roar.
The rocket carrying the seven challenger astronauts took off the stars. Sadly,
none of them would reach their destination.
73 seconds after launch the challenger broke apart at 46,000 feet.
The cause would later be determined to be two small rubber O-rings that failed
in the cold temperatures. Something NASA had been warned about.
It was an entirely preventable disaster.
Although the craft went up in flames it's they thought that the crew survived
the initial far only dying. When the cap crashed into the ocean,
two minutes later,
the last words captured by the inflight recorder belong to Mike Smith just
before the shuttle disintegrated. He could be heard saying, oh, after that,
there was nothing. At this point,
the details of the tragedy itself are well known.
How the cruise families were on the grounds.
Watching as the challenge are ignited before their eyes,
how TV cameras broadcast the disaster live including to millions of children,
watching bars, special links in their schools, the other equally sad,
but smaller details.
Like how Cliff's nine year olds received a letter she'd written a week after the
accident or how her father had said,
he felt sure Gregory Jarvis had held her hand as they felt towards the air
ocean, a last act of kindness before their lives were cut short.
We could go on the switch activated on Mike Smith's breathing pack from behind
suggesting Judith reson accused her last moments on earth to try and help her
cremate. The sad return of Ellison on Mizu is remains to his beloved Hawaii.
The scholarship program,
since set up in Ron McNair's name for disadvantaged kids,
we could go on at this point,
there's maybe no need thousands of documentaries already exist on the disaster
in its aftermath. With this episode, though,
we wanted to do something different to focus on the lesser told story,
that story of the crew themselves, although in the end,
what made them famous of deaths?
All seven astronauts on the challenger had lived remarkable lives.
Some had risen up from disadvantaged backgrounds to make something of
themselves. Others had followed a dream with a laser focused ambition.
Others had just been wonderfully ordinary, ordinary husbands, wives, fathers,
mothers who left behind void in their family's lives.
When covering tragedies like this,
it's often easier to focus on the disaster itself to put things in a
political context or zero in on the shocking details,
but it's worth remembering to the real lives of those involved.
The people behind the names,
the seven challenger crew members with their own stories and dreams each so
worthy of being remembered on Auca McNair.
Resick SCOBY Smith, Jarvis mace.
They may be long dead now, but their memories should not be forgotten.